Bylaws of the Lehigh Valley Local Chapter of Democratic Socialists of America
=============================================================================

***Adopted March 18, 2019***

# ARTICLE I. Name.

The name of the Chapter will be the Lehigh Valley Local Chapter of
Democratic Socialists of America (DSA). DSA is a not-for-profit
corporation.

# ARTICLE II. Purpose.

The Lehigh Valley Local Chapter of Democratic Socialists of America
seeks to facilitate the transition to a truly democratic and socialist
society, one in which the means/resources of production are
democratically and socially controlled.

DSA rejects an economic order based solely on private profit, alienated
labor, gross inequalities of wealth and power, discrimination based on
race, gender or sexual orientation, and brutality and violence in
defense of the status quo.

DSA envisions a humane social order based on democratic control of
resources, production, and economic planning, equitable distribution,
gender and racial equality, and non-oppressive relationships.

Our conception of socialism is a profoundly democratic one. It is rooted
in the belief that human beings should be free to develop to their
fullest potential, that public policies should be determined not by
wealth but by popular participation, and that individual liberties
should be carefully safeguarded. It is committed to a freedom of speech
that does not recoil from dissent, to a freedom to organize independent
trade unions, women's groups, political parties, and other formations
\-- recognizing these as essential bulwarks against the dangers of an
intrusive state. It is committed to a freedom of religion that
acknowledges the rights of those for whom spiritual concerns are
central.

We are socialists because we are developing a concrete strategy for
achieving that vision. In the present, we are building a visible
socialist presence within the broad democratic Left. In the long run, we
hope to build a majority movement capable of making democratic socialism
a reality in the United States. Our strategy acknowledges the class
structure of the U.S. society. This class structure means that there is
a basic conflict of interest between those sectors with enormous
economic power and the vast majority of the population.

# ARTICLE III. Membership.

## Section 1. Membership.

Members of the Lehigh Valley Local Chapter of DSA will be those
individuals whose dues to national DSA are paid in full, who reside
and/or work in the greater Pennsylvania Northampton County, Lehigh
County and Southern Monroe County area. Individuals may not be members
of the Local Chapter without being members of national DSA. It will be
the responsibility of members to approve policies and guidelines for the
operation of the Local Chapter, to elect delegates to the national
convention, to vote on matters related to local and national policy, to
make recommendations on issues, policies, activities, and ongoing
efforts pursuant to local or national political goals, and to contribute
toward the Local Chapter\'s goals as described in Article II, to vote on
matters related to local and national policy, to make recommendations on
issues, policies, activities, and ongoing efforts pursuant to local or
national political goals, and to contribute toward the Local Chapter\'s
goals as described in Article II. and to make recommendations on issues
and other matters to the National Political Committee of DSA.

## Section 2. Resignation and Expulsion of members

Any member may resign from National DSA by submitting an email or letter
of resignation to DSA's national office. DSA. Any member may resign from
the Local Chapter and become an at-large member of National DSA by
sending an email or letter of resignation to both the Administrator of
the Local Chapter and DSA's national office. Furthermore, if they are
found to be consistently engaging in undemocratic, disruptive behavior,
or if they are found to be under the discipline of any democratic
centralist organization, the Local Chapter may vote to expel them from
the Local Chapter of DSA. In order for such a finding to be made,
another DSA member must formally bring written charges against the
member in question to the Local Chapter Organizing Committee, which will
set the date of a Local Chapter meeting for deliberations on the
charges. The member in question must receive a copy of the written
charges and notice of the meeting a minimum of two (2) weeks before that
meeting takes place. Expulsion of a member requires a two-thirds vote of
the Local Chapter meeting. An expelled member in good standing may
appeal to the National Political Committee of DSA.

## Section 3. Voluntary Donations.

As mandated by the national Constitution and Bylaws, the Local Chapter
may establish a Local Chapter pledge system of voluntary donations for
its members. The payment of a Local Chapter donation may not be a
requirement for voting or for holding Local Chapter office.

## Section 4. Privacy Concerns.

Care will be taken to protect the privacy of each member's contact
information. Public information includes the names of Organizing
Committee members. Protected information includes member email
addresses, phone numbers, and mailing or physical addresses. Protected
information may only be shared to members outside the Organizing
Committee on a need-to-know basis to facilitate communication to
members. Anyone with access to protected information must agree to use
it only to further goals of the Local Chapter.

# ARTICLE IV. Local Chapter Meetings.

## Section 1. General Meeting.

The Local Chapter will hold a minimum of one (1) General Meeting
annually for purposes of electing officers. All members of the Local
Chapter will be sent notice of, and an agenda for, the General Meeting.
Notice may be sent by electronic means, but individuals who have not
provided an email address must be sent a paper copy or contacted by
phone or text. The General Meeting will elect Local Chapter officers,
may adopt an annual budget, and debate and pass resolutions and
priorities for the year. In general, it is the highest legislative body
of the Local Chapter. The General Meeting may coincide with a Regular
Meeting.

## Section 2. Regular Meetings.

The Local Chapter will hold Regular Meetings at least four (4) times
annually, the time and place of which will be set in a schedule
published and distributed by the Local Chapter Organizing Committee at
least ten (10) days prior to the meeting. The Regular Meetings will set
Local Chapter policy and work priorities and may include political
discussion or education sessions.Working groups and Branches will give
any updates.

The Local Chapter Organizing Committee will propose the agenda at the
beginning of Regular Meetings. Brief Discussion for additions and
changes to the agenda may happen at the start of the meeting. In
general, the Regular Meeting is the operating legislative body of the
Local Chapter.

## Section 3. Special Meetings.

The Local Chapter Organizing Committee may call a Special Meeting of the
Local Chapter on five (5) days' notice when an urgent and important
matter requires deliberation.

## Section 4. Quorum.

A quorum of 10 percent of the members (but not fewer than six (6)
persons) is required for General, Regular, or Special Meetings to
transact business.

## Section 5. Decision-Making Authority.

The General Membership, meeting in a General, Regular or Special
Meeting, shall constitute the highest decision-making body of the Local
Chapter. All decisions, policies, agendas, statements, and other items
of business decided at these Meetings are binding over any other body of
the Local Chapter. Meetings may overturn the decisions of prior
Meetings, but no other body may.

# ARTICLE V. Local Chapter Officers: Powers and Duties.

## Section 1. Officers and Terms.

The officers of the Local Chapter will be the two Co-Chairs,
Administrator, Treasurer, and Communications Coordinator, Campaigns
Coordinator, Political Education Coordinator, Socializing Coordinator.
The term of office will be one year, and will run from February through
January or until their successors are elected.

## Section 2. Vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy in any Local Chapter office, a special
election for the remainder of the vacant member\'s term shall be
triggered within thirty (30) days after the opening of the vacancy if
regular elections are not to be held within sixty (60) days of the
vacancy. Special elections may coincide with a Regular Meeting. If
within sixy (60) days of the vacancy, the Organizing Committee may
appoint a replacement.

## Section 3. Co-Chairs.

a\. There shall be two Co-Chairs. Co-Chairs will be the chief executive
officers of the Local Chapter. They will preside over Local Chapter and
Organizing Committee meetings or will appoint a substitute to assume the
powers and duties of the presiding officer as specified in *Robert's
Rules of Order, Newly Revised 11th Edition*. The Co-Chairs
will be the official public spokespersons for the Local Chapter and will
initiate such actions and policies as the Local Chapter's general
welfare may demand.

b\. The Co-Chairs will be responsible also for coordinating the
day-to-day operations and political work of the Local Chapter's Branches
and Committees.

c\. The Co-Chairs will report to Local Chapter Regular Meetings on the
business of the Organizing Committee Meetings, at which time a copy of
the minutes of those meetings will be available for inspection.

d\. One of the co-chairs must not be a cisgender man.

## Section 4. Administrator.

a\. The Administrator will be responsible for answering all
correspondence and queries of the Local Chapter and for maintaining an
up-to-date membership list of the Local Chapter. They will ensure
effective communication with national DSA and with Lcal Chapter members,
including notifying them of a meeting. They will temporarily assume the
responsibilities of the Co-Chair, if neither Co-Chair is able to do so.

b\. The Administrator will be responsible also for ensuring someone takes
minutes of all Local Chapter and Organizing Committee Meetings. The
Administrator does not have to take the minutes at every meeting and can
assign a member in good standing to take minutes. The administrator
should create a template of what should and should not be included in
minutes. The administrator should review the draft minutes that are
taken and edit them before they\'re sent out. The Administrator will
have custody of all minutes taken, and the resolutions, reports and
other official records of the Local Chapter. They will transfer official
records in good condition to their successor. Official records will
include meeting minutes and member lists.

## Section 5. Treasurer.

The Treasurer will be responsible for the funds and financial records of
the Local Chapter. All funds collected by the Local Chapter will be
turned over to the Treasurer, who will deposit them in a bank account
under the name of the Local Chapter. In cooperation with the
Administrator, the Treasurer will be responsible for ensuring that
membership dues are paid up-to-date. The Treasurer will prepare the
annual Local Chapter budget and deliver the Local Chapter financial
report to the General Meeting of the Local Chapter, as well as periodic
progress reports as requested by the Organizing Committee of the Local
Chapter.

## Section 6. Communications Coordinator.

The Communications Coordinator shall be responsible, in cooperation with the Organizing Committee, for coordinating the public and internal
communications functions of the Chapter, including without limitation: (a) preparation of printed and digital materials; (b) production of newsletters, magazines, and other digital content; (c) management of the Chapter's social media presence; (d) coordination of the Chapter's
relationships with the news media; and (e) promoting and publicizing the Chapter's projects, campaigns and events.

## Section 7. Campaigns Coordinator.

The Campaigns Coordinator shall be responsible for coordinating the
activity of the Working Groups. They shall assist in the operations of
the Working Groups, including assisting in the organizational structure,
ensuring meetings of the committees operate productively according to
principles of transparency, accessibility, and full participation, and
reporting back to the Organizing Committee on the progress and
operations of the Project Committees. The Organizing Committee may, by
majority vote, appoint the Campaigns Coordinator to be the lead
organizer of Working Groups.

## Section 8. Political Education Coordinator.

The Political Education Coordinator shall be responsible for the
membership and public educational work of the Local Chapter, including
coordinating and assisting in the research needs of the Project and
Standing Committees. The Political Education Coordinator shall arrange
the Local Chapter formal political discussions, study groups within the
Local Chapter, and forums.

## Section 9. Socializing Coordinator.

The Socializing Coordinator shall be responsible for building community
among the membership The Socializing Coordinator shall organize
community building aspects at regular meetings, and social events
outside regular meeting such as Socialist bar crawls, trivia nights,
board game nights, craft nights, etc. If no members are interested in
filling this position, the Political Education Coordinator will take on
the responsibilities within this position, until the position if filled.

## Section 10. Additional Duties.

The Local Chapter Organizing Committee may assign additional temporary
duties to an officer of the Local Chapter, so long as such assignments
do not conflict with the designation of responsibilities outlined in
these Bylaws.

# ARTICLE VI. Organizing Committee.

## Section 1. Composition.

The Local Chapter Organizing Committee will be composed of the eight (8)
officers of the Local Chapter and the chair(s) of any Local Chapter
Branches.

## Section 2. Duties.

a\. The Organizing Committee administers the affairs of the Local Chapter
and oversees the implementation of the decisions of the General and
Regular Meetings; it may also propose policy to the General and Regular
Meetings. It will have the power to receive reports of any Committee or
Branch, and advise thereon, to call Special Meetings of the Local
Chapter, and to act on any matter that requires immediate and urgent
action. The Organizing Committee is the regular executive body of the
Local Chapter, and thus subordinate to its Legislative bodies, the
General and Regular Meetings.

b\. The Local Chapter Organizing Committee will be responsible for
establishing program activities for the Local Chapter, for proposing
guidelines and policies that will subsequently be voted on by members in
good standing of DSA, and for acting on the organization's behalf
between Local Chapter meetings.

## Section 3. Meetings.

The meetings of the Organizing Committee will be held at the call of one
(1) of the Co-Chairs at such intervals as may be determined by a prior
Organizing Committee Meeting or by consultation with any three (3)
members of the Organizing Committee. All members of the Organizing
Committee must (ordinarily) be given four (4) days oral, written, or
electronic notice of regular Organizing Committee Meetings; a 24-hour
notice may be given under special emergency circumstances.

## Section 4. Quorum.

A quorum of a simple majority, including at least four (4) of the eight
(8) officers, is required for the transaction of Organizing Committee
business.

## Section 5. Board of Directors

For the purposes of meeting the requirements of local and state
incorporation laws, the Chapter shall have a "Board of Directors"
consisting of members of the Organizing Committee assigned for the
purpose as logical and required by law. Officers of the Organizing
Committee so appointed do not gain any new or additional powers or
responsibilities except those strictly required by law.

# ARTICLE VII. Branches.

## Section 1. Definition.

A Branch is a subgroup of the Chapter formed to facilitate participation
in the Local Chapter in a logistically convenient way. Branches may be
defined by geography, membership in an institution, or language. It is
expected that Branches be able to carry out as much of as many of the
pillar functions of the Chapter for their members as necessary for their
logistical purposes. The chairs of Branches will membership on the Local
Chapter Organizing Committee.

Young Democratic Socialists of America (YDSA) chapters within the
geographic area defined by a DSA Local Chapter may affiliate as a branch
of that Local Chapter, in which case the local YDSA chapter may send a
representative to the Local Chapter Organizing Committee.

## Section 2. Formation.

Any group of at least five (5) Members of the Local Chapter, in good
standing, may request to be recognized as a Branch. They must apply to
the Organizing Committee in writing. Their application must include the
names of its members; a description of purposes, functions, and
membership criteria; and any other information deemed necessary by the
Organizing Committee. A majority vote of the general membership at a
Meeting shall be required to establish a Branch. YDSA chapters need only
show proof of being an officially recognized chapter of YDSA as part of
a generic request to be recognized as a Branch of the Local Chapter,
subject to approval by a majority vote of the general membership at a
Meeting. Sections 3 and 4 below shall not be required of YDSA
chapter-Branches.

## Section 3. Structure, Membership, and Elections

Each branch will create written guidelines defining its purpose,
functions, and membership criteria in detail. A branch may create formal
bylaws if it chooses. Such guidelines or bylaws may establish the
Branch\'s methods and structures as long as they do not violate these
bylaws. Each Branch shall be responsible for electing its leadership and
Organizing Committee representation. Every Local Chapter member may vote
in only two Branch elections for Organizing Committee representatives,
although they may be a member of as many Branches as they wish. Branch
leaders shall be responsible for scheduling and organizing meetings and
actions of their Branch. In the event of a vacancy of a Branch leader or
Organizing Committee representative, the Branch may vote to elect new
leadership or Organizing Committee representation. Each Branch shall
maintain an official membership list.

## Section 4. Dissolution

A Branch may have its status revoked by a majority vote of the
membership at a Meeting. A Branch may also choose to dissolve itself by
means specified in its Branch guidelines or bylaws. In the event that a
Branch chooses to split into several new Branches, each new Branch must
apply for membership through the same method as creating any Branch,
although the Organizing Committee may choose to waive requirements for
certain documentation if it is identical to the prior or parent Branch.

# ARTICLE VIII. Working Groups.

## Section 1. Definition.

The Local Chapter will have Working Groups, which will consist of a
group of Local Chapter members in good standing. Working Groups can be
formed to address operational needs, run campaigns, or organize work
around a particular issue over an indefinite period of time.

## Section 2. Formation

To establish a Working Group, a group of no less than two Local Chapter
members in good standing must submit a charter that includes a group
name, a mission statement or objectives, any limitations on working
group membership, and an acting chair until the co-chairs can be decided
upon democratically. The members must make their charter available to
Local Chapter members at least one week (7 days) prior to a General,
Membership, or Special Meeting before the Working Group\'s charter may
be voted on. A majority vote will establish the charter and creation of
a Working Group.

## Section 3. Leadership of Working Groups

Membership in a Working Group shall be open to all Local Chapter members
in good standing unless the committee\'s charter limits membership, in
which case the terms of the charter shall control. Working Groups shall
maintain an official membership list. After the Working Group is
created, but by no later than the Working Group\'s second meeting, the
committee shall hold elections for one (1) lead organizer and, if the
Working Group chooses, one (1) co-organizer. Terms shall be for either
six months or one year at the Working Group members\' choosing, and
incumbents may stand for reelection.

## Section 4. Duties.

The members of a Working Group are responsible for executing their
respective body\'s strategy in fulfillment of its objectives. Organizers
are responsible for organizing their respective body\'s members, running
meetings, acting as liaisons to the Organizing Committee, and serving as
the committee\'s points of contact to the membership.

When a Working Group\'s proposed activities relate to the mission of
another Working Group, the lead organizers of that Working Group shall
be notified. Should a dispute arise between two or more Working Ggroup
that cannot be resolved between them, it shall be resolved at a Regular
Meeting.

A Working Group\'s activities shall be reviewed by the Organizing
Committee at its meetings, and meeting minutes and other committee
documentation, as well as all financial receipts and statements, shall
be kept up to date with the Local Chapter\'s Administrator and Treasurer
respectively. Working Groups shall report on their activities to the
membership at the General Meeting or more frequently at Regular or
Special Meetings as necessary.

## Section 5. Dissolution.

A Working Group may dissolve itself by majority vote, or by charter if
the Working Group is temporary in nature. Dissolution of a working group
can also be proposed by either a vote of the Organizing Committee or a
proposal of dissolution presented by no fewer than five Local Chapter
members in good standing. The notice of vote for dissolution must be
presented at least one week (7 days) prior to a General, Membership, or
Special Meeting to be eligible for voting. A majority vote will dissolve
the Working Group.

# ARTICLE IX. Delegates to National, Regional, and State Bodies.

## Section 1. Eligibility to Vote.

Local Chapter delegates and alternates to the National Convention, as
well as to any regional or state organizations, will be elected by
members in good standing of the Local Chapter of DSA.

## Section 2. Schedule of Elections to National, Regional, or State Organizations.

Elections for the National Convention delegation will be held on the
schedule announced by the national organization. Elections to regional
or state organizations will be held on the schedule announced by those
organizations.

## Section 3. Method of Voting.

Following Article V, Section 5 of national DSA's Constitution,delegates
to the National Convention must be elected by secret ballot. Following
Article VI, Section 3, of national DSA's Bylaws, Local Chapters "may
determine their own method of election of delegates to the Convention
except that a petition from 10% of a Local's membership or a motion
supported by 15% of those present and voting at the Local meeting which
determines the method of election will require the use of the Hare
system in that Local's election of delegates to the National
Convention."

# ARTICLE X. Prohibited Activity.

Lehigh Valley Local Chapter will not engage in activity prohibited by
the IRS guidelines established for 501(c)(4) organizations or similar
rules established by the state of Pennsylvania. Nor will the Local
Chapter engage in any activity prohibited by resolutions adopted by
DSA's National Convention or DSA's National Political Committee.

# ARTICLE XI. Elections, Nominations, and Recall.

## Section 1. Nominations Committee.

A three (3)-person Nominations Committee will be established at least
one (1) month prior to every election by vote of a Regular Meeting. It
will solicit and receive nominations for the positions to be elected.

## Section 2. Nominations Process.

Nominations for Local Chapter officers and delegates to the National
Convention will be opened at least 10 days before and closed at the
meeting at which elections take place. The call for nominations will be
announced to all members in good standing of Lehigh Valley DSA as soon
as nominations are open.

## Section 3. Uncontested Positions.

If a position is uncontested, the nominee may be declared elected by
voice vote.

## Section 4. Recall.

Any officer of the Local Chapter may be recalled for malfeasance or
failure to fulfill their duties or obligations as an officer. In order
to recall or remove an officer, a member in good standing must formally
petition to remove a member of the Organizing Committee, by presenting a
petition signed by 10% of general members to the Organizing Committee.
The Organizing Committee will set a date of a Local Chapter meeting for
deliberations on the accused officer's removal. The officer in question
must receive written documentation of the specific reasons for the
removal request and notice of the meeting a minimum of two weeks before
the meeting takes place. The accused officer will be given a chance to
speak in their own defense at this meeting. Removal of an officer
requires a two-thirds vote of the Local Chapter meeting. If an officer
is recalled, the vacancy triggers a special election.

# ARTICLE XII. Endorsements.

## Section 1. Electoral Endorsements

The General Membership in a Regular or General Meeting is the only body
authorized to make electoral endorsements on behalf of the Local
Chapter. Unless otherwise authorized, members or committees of the Local
Chapter are prohibited from campaigning as representatives of DSA for
candidates or ballot measures that the Local has not officially
endorsed.

## Section 2. Endorsements of Actions

The Organizing Committee shall be authorized to endorse activist events,
urgent actions, or make statements in support of activist campaigns on
behalf of the chapter.

## Section 3. Endorsements of Campaigns

The General Membership in a Regular or General Meeting shall be the only
body authorized to endorse Local Chapter participation in a long-term
activist campaign.

# ARTICLE XIII. Amendments.

Proposed amendments to these Bylaws must be made by written resolution,
endorsed by five (5) members of the Local Chapter of DSA and submitted
to the Organizing Committee at least one (1) month in advance of a
General or Regular Meeting. The Organizing Committee is required to
provide the Local Chapter membership with at least two (2) weeks'
written or electronic notice of the proposed amendments. The amendment
must be approved by a majority vote of two (2) consecutive (Regular or
General) Local Chapter meetings.

# ARTICLE XIV. Rules of the Local Chapter.

## Section 1. Rules.

The Rules contained in *Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised 11th
Edition*, will govern this Local Chapter in cases to which
they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with these
Bylaws. Consensus decision-making is desirable where feasible, but
meetings must submit to *Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised 11th
Edition* upon the request of a member.

## Section 2. Action Out of Order.

Any action taken by an officer or member of the Local Chapter in
contravention of these Bylaws is null and void.

## Section 3. Harassment Policy.

The Local Chapter will follow the [Harassment Policy of national
DSA](https://www.dsausa.org/about-us/harassment-policy-resolution-33/).

## Section 4. Code of Conduct

The Local Chapter may establish, by vote of a Meeting, a code of conduct
(Code of Conduct) that outlines the boundaries of acceptable behavior by
members of the Local Chapter and describes options for censure of
members, including suspension or expulsion. The Code of Conduct shall be
made available to all members of the Local Chapter. Amendments to the
Code of Conduct must be approved at a Meeting.

## Section 5. Diversity.

The Local Chapter should conduct continual outreach to people of
oppressed races, genders, class backgrounds and other groups to ensure
that our chapter accurately reflects the communities we represent and
fight for.

# ARTICLE XV. Distribution of assets.

Upon dissolution of the organization, any residual assets shall become
property of the national organization of Democratic Socialists of
America.
